I see that Jerry Journey is heading up here already to tell us something about remembering
Seattlean poetry and also Jennifer Nightingale is going to get help too.
Say, how do you do?
It's a great honor to be here.
I was supposed to be a bar.
This was supposed to be Calling of the Bards, at which my name was not supposed to be in
here.
I'm very flattered that it was though because I'm always referred to as Bron Journey's
dad or Betty Pritchard's dad sometimes, but Betty Pritchard's husband most of the time,
but I have been accused of being her father.
Two reasons, she's got hair and I haven't and hers is not gray and mine is.
But at any rate, that was my attempt at being humorous.
I should let Bron tell the jokes, but by your laughter you must be Presbyterians who don't
really think very much is funny or you could be Baptists who don't think anything is funny.
But at least the General Assembly of regular Baptists, Methodists however, they politely
laugh even if they don't think it's funny and Baptists don't laugh even if they think
it.
I'm getting so deep in here and my wife said, do not bring up anything controversial.
So I better go.
Now, what I'm going to do, Mrs. or Ms. or Jackie Cederholm has given me an allocation
of five minutes to not say my poem necessarily, but my wife has spent three weeks, well she
spent three days in historical events around the Old Wells Church.
The three weeks has been spent in my typing it.
So I think I would like to read what she wrote and then maybe I can get your assistance because
I don't think I can do this in five minutes.
So to keep me from watching my watch, would you please watch your watches and when five
minutes are up, get up and tell Mrs. Cederholm and she will jump up and say, kajda gegg,
which means in Welsh, please be quiet or a more literal translation would be shut up
and sit down and that's what I'll do and then I'll steal away and we can forget that poem.
But if I can, anyway, I've used the five minutes on this preamble.
So at any rate, my wife wrote this and she was in the Welsh Church for 25 years of her
first 25 years of her life and this is her memories.
It's titled Memories of the Welsh in Seattle.
I am not a public speaker and she thinks I am.
So take three seconds.
I am not a public speaker but my husband agreed to deliver this talk if I would jot down some
of my fond memories of the Welsh times.
Once I heard a friend give a talk and she too was uncomfortable speaking publicly and
she used the alphabet as a guide.
It worked for her so I will do the same using as many letters as time will permit.
A stands for Anwyl, which is a word of endearment.
I like the definition beloved because 10th and East John was the home of the Welsh Presbyterian
Church, a beloved place to many Welsh that came from near and far.
B is for Bible because the small band of people truly believed in the word of God and their
faith took them through the many hardships that occurred in that time in history.
C is for Cymru or Cymraeg.
They spoke Welsh, they prayed in Welsh, they preached in Welsh, sang in Welsh and they
settled here because the climate and countryside reminded them of their home in Welsh called
Cartref.
C also stands for Celebrity.
We had our share of those.
Frances Williams, with the help of her Welsh Church family, went to New York City to become
an arranger and composer for the Harold Flammer Music Publishing Company.
The tutor, known as Ted Jones, is a nationally acclaimed hydroplane designer and driver and
is still involved in his field.
Arthur and Jane Davis pursued a successful career in the singing and acting on the stage
of theaters and opera in New York City.
Betty Lee Watson became a champion swimmer and she was trained by Ray Daughters, one
of the great swimming coaches in the United States of America.
She even got in contests, swimming contests with Helene Madison and Beter on several occasions
and she was the greatest women swimmer in that era in the United States.
So anyway, that was the celebrities that came from that little church, which the whole church
was about one half the size of this.
D reminds me of Mrs. George Davies, who lived in the Antique Chapel, which means church
along with her daughter, Gwen, and Emlyn, her son.
Mrs. Davies made real Welsh tea, hot and flavorful.
I can attest to that.
Boy, was that good tea.
E stands for eglois, which means church.
This place was the center of their spiritual and social life.
My Sunday school class met in the first two rows of the sanctuary and Mrs. T.C. Williams
was our teacher.
Other classes were held in the sanctuary as well as the entire church.
We had prayer meetings, choir practice, as well as Gmanbaganys and the first of marches,
as this is, St. David's Day celebrations, unsurpassed anywhere, plus church dinners
and small and great istead beds, where my mom's barabrith almost always took first prize.
F stands for fighenu, which means disguised or barred name.
That's what I'm supposed to be, a bard.
But this poem, compared to these great bards, is pretty much like my poem compared to Longfellow's.
These people were very excellent.
At any rate, not that I could understand them, they were all in Welsh.
The bards sent their poverty from afar, such as Olin Hughes.
Bard name was Glasgowite from Vancouver, B.C.
Richard Morris, Kyriag bard name, from Seldovia, Alaska, and our version, our very own bard,
T. Charles Williams.
This poetry was an important part of the first of march celebrations.
G stands for Gmanbaganys.
You cannot imagine the singing in that acoustically perfect church.
There were numerous conductors from which to choose, some of which were Owen J. Williams,
Annie Jones Hughes, Hugh Morris Jones, David Pritchard, William Park Pritchard, and others.
H stands for Hwyl.
The Gmanbaganys were spirit-filled, as well as the Sunday services, and the Hwyl prevailed
as they sang their hymns.
I stands for I cherish the memory of the people in that church.
The young people addressed the elders as auntie or uncle, in other words, auntie Hughes or
uncle Williams, and the elders addressed each other as mister and missus, regardless of
how long they'd known each other.
J stands for Jones, Jenkins, and James.
There were many of each.
They had to be identified by descriptive adjectives.
Jones, a pintur, that's painter, and Jones, a Kent.
K, speaking of Kent, reminds me of Tide and Nine's farm, where so many well-social events
were held.
Tide and Nine means grandfather and grandmother, respectively.
L stands for looking forward to so many summer picnics.
One was at Alki, all of us boarding the streetcar with our baskets and riding the trestle with
the old streetcar swaying from side to side.
This ride was not for the squeamish or the weak of stomach.
We frequented the bathhouse, long since torn down, and displayed our locker key pinned
to the strap of our bathing suits as we strolled the promenade.
The next picnic was held at Cowl Lake, now known as Lake Meridian.
This required us boarding a truck, which also swayed, and singing our way to and from the
lake.
The big picnic was the Labor Day picnic, convening at stove number three at Woodland Park, the
day after the Gamond Vagani.
Singing at these picnics was something like, you've never heard and will never hear again.
The younger set would frequently be embarrassed at the parents' antics and head up the hill
to visit the monkeys.
M stands for Moita, the love we had for one another.
This little band of hardy folk sustained their grief in hard times because of their love
for one another.
N stands for Nostalch, good night.
After evening and morning services, we'd all shout Nostalch, hugging and kissing each other
until the next time we met.
O stands for Organist, which included Diana Jones, Annie Jones Hughes, Frances Williams,
Edwin Williams, and yours truly.
Ed would frequently add a little culture by playing blue-green gas, the theme song of
the Joe Penner radio program aired on Saturday nights.
This would be rendered in the organ's treble register while playing the offeratory, and
all Ed's mom would say was, Oh Edwin!
P stands for Preacher, John Reese Evans, J. Michael Hughes, Reverend Josiah Daniels, Reverend
John Reese Williams, and also Dr. John R. Johns, who is preached in this church.
P is also for pews.
Each family had their own pew, and we were fortunate to sit across the aisle from Griffith
Swords' family.
Fortunate because during and after the service, they would slip me a Welsh mint, a candy I've
never been able to find again, neither here nor in Canada.
They were really good.
Q stands for Quartet.
They had some of the finest voices in all registers.
Any type of ensemble could be organized.
Mainly, the voices were untrained, but who needs training with that kind of natural ability?
R stands for reminiscing.
My first 25 years were spent in this church, and then the church was closed.
I'm sure there are many times in advance I've forgotten, and many events happened before
my time.
If anyone would like to say a word about those days, please do so.
Is that okay, Jack?
I know, but where is Jack?
She's the one there.
Oh yeah, is that okay if somebody gets up and takes my time?
More than five minutes, I already take it.
Okay, anyone want to, well I won't.
You do that, okay?
I have a tough time with the alphabet.
Anyway, I better keep going.
S stands for sociability.
Gamundas, tees, esthedvits, concerts, and conversations abounded in this group.
T stands for time is running out, so I will dispense with the rest of the alphabet.
Whoever heard of Welsh words starting with V, X, and Z anyway?
U, W, and Y are used by all of us, us, you, and we.
All of us should be grateful for this small band of Welsh who came to this strange land
and made a life for themselves and a heritage for us.
Pride in our Welsh.
That's the end of my wife's write-up.
Now you're free to leave now because now comes my poem.
And it also is entitled, Reminiscing.
So here goes.
This is supposed to be good, but it isn't.
I'm not a real Welshman from birth and baby carriage, but when I went a Welsh girl, I'm
a Welshman now by marriage.
I've learned about the early Welsh, so you can learn it too.
As every year unfolds itself, I'll share it all with you.
Life for the Welsh was in their church.
Location, 10th and John.
If you heard a Welshman say it, it sounds like 10th and Sean.
Morgans, Jeffries, Owens, Jones, Evans, Davies, Hughes.
Richard Williams were typical of names that fill the pews.
Cars were few, so most all walked.
For many blocks they came, gathered in their beloved church to praise his holy name.
When the pragerther stood to preach, his voice would rise and fall.
When I heard his messages, I understood no word at all.
When the congregation prayed to God, I remember Mr. Hughes.
He would turn and kneel down and pray upon the pews.
The weekend of our Labor Day, the Gamon Begani's here.
The Welsh all got together and sang those hymns so dear.
Their voices rang to heaven.
Forgotten was their toil.
After verses 1 and 2, they all got in the hwyl.
Then it wouldn't park on Monday, a picnic all day long.
With that many Welshmen, they were bound to sing a song.
The passersby would stand and stare, and to the songs they'd hark.
They started singing early and didn't end till after dark.
When they had a social in the church's social hall, they came for many miles around, Welshmen
one and all.
The food they brought was heavenly.
It cannot be pronounced.
Served at Nosanlawan as Pragerther had announced, there was barabrith and barakerch and also
barasein, teybach and wheels of cows for all the Welsh to dine.
And then at private parties with teybach and barabrith, they'd laugh and dare each other
to sing without their teeth.
They would.
I've been to those parties.
The Welsh are kind of stubborn, though I hate to say it here.
If you want some proof of this, let me know your ear.
Pronouncing towns is simple.
The Welsh swear this is so.
If you believe that, then try to say, llan bar ffuskin gwyth go geryth, when rywbos
go, go, go.
They're a little superstitious.
To this they won't admit.
Hat on a bed, black cat, or wearing green, will throw them in a fit.
Those glory years have passed.
They're prime.
Those years are gone, I fear.
As an inferior substitute, it's guys like me you hear.
Those golden years are past and to me seem but a myth.
In the hearts of all those Welsh, rings clearly, comry a byth.
Thank you very much.
Thank you.
Thank you very much for your work.
Jennifer?
Oh, there you are.